.. _GSoD2019:

Google Season of Docs 2019
==========================

AboutCode has been accepted as a participant in the Google Season of Documents in 2019 as a
mentoring org, and is looking for people with technical writing skills. This page contains
information for technical writers and anyone else interested in helping.

AboutCode is a family of FOSS projects to uncover data about software code:


* Where does the code come from? which software package?
* What is its license? copyright?
* Is the code secure, maintained, well coded?

All these questions are important, and are relevant to millions of free and open source software
components available on the web for reuse. The answers are critical to ensure that everyone can
safely consume free and open source software.

*Join us to make it so!*

Our tools are used to help detect and report the origin and license of source code, packages and
binaries as well as to discover software and package dependencies, and in the future track security
vulnerabilities, bugs and other important software package attributes. This is a suite of command
line tools, web-based and API servers and desktop applications.

Table of Contents
-----------------


- :ref:`list_projects_aboutcode`
- :ref:`contact_gsod`
- :ref:`tech_gsod`
- :ref:`writing_skills_gsod`
- :ref:`application_gsod`
- :ref:`doc_project_ideas_gsod`
- :ref:`tutorial_ideas_gsod`

  * :ref:`scan_a_codebase_and_analyze_the_results`

- :ref:`how_to_ideas_gsod`

  * :ref:`how_to_get_the_license_clarity_score_of_a_package`
  * :ref:`how_to_discover_licensing_issues_in_a_software_project`

- :ref:`referance_ideas_gsod`

  * :ref:`scancode_output_formats`

- :ref:`discussion_ideas_gsod`

  * :ref:`integrating_scancode_into_a_software_development_lifecycle`

- :ref:`your_documentation_project_ideas`
- :ref:`mentoring_gsod`

.. _list_projects_aboutcode:

List of AboutCode projects
--------------------------

Note that the AboutCode focus for GSOD 2019 is on **ScanCode Toolkit** and **ScanCode Workbench**\,
although proposals to improve the documents of other AboutCode projects are welcome.


- `ScanCode Toolkit <https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit>`_ is a popular command line tool to
  scan code for licenses, copyrights and packages, used by many organizations and FOSS projects,
  small and large.

- `Scancode Workbench <https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench>`_ (formerly AboutCode Manager)
  is a JavaScript, Electron-based desktop application to review scan results and document your
  origin and license conclusions.

- Other AboutCode projects are described at https://www.aboutcode.org and
  https://github.com/nexB/aboutcode

  We also work closely with, contribute to and have co-started several other orgs and projects:

- `Package URL <https://github.com/package-url>`_ is an emerging standard to reference software
  packages of all types with simple, readable and concise URLs.

- `SPDX <http://SPDX.org>`_ is the Software Package Data Exchange, a specification to document
  the origin and licensing of software packages.

- `ClearlyDefined <ClearlyDefined.io>`_ is a project to review FOSS software and help FOSS projects
  to improve their licensing and documentation clarity.

.. _contact_gsod:

Contact
-------

Join the chat online or by IRC at https://gitter.im/aboutcode-org/discuss
Introduce yourself and start the discussion!

For personal issues, you can contact the primary org admin directly:
@pombredanne and pombredanne@gmail.com

or the GSOD coordinator directly at dmclark@nexb.com

Please ask questions the smart way: http://www.catb.org/~esr/faqs/smart-questions.html

.. _tech_gsod:

Technology
----------

We primarily use Python (and some C/C++) for code analysis. We use Electron/JavaScript for GUI.

Our domain includes text analysis and processing (for instance for copyright and license
detection), parsing (for package manifest formats), binary analysis (to detect the origin and
license of binaries, which source code they come from, etc.) as well as web based tools and APIs
(to expose the tools and libraries as web services) and low-level data structures for efficient
matching (such as Aho-Corasick and other automata).

Our documentation is provided in text files that support the help function of our command line
tools. We also have begun to provide documentation in the Wiki section of some AboutCode projects.

.. _writing_skills_gsod:

Technical Writing Skills Needed
-------------------------------

Incoming technical writers will need the following skills:


* Ability to install and configure open source code from GitHub.
* Ability to understand and run programs from the command line in a terminal window.
* Familiarity with the four document functions described at
  https://www.divio.com/blog/documentation/
* Ability to create and edit wiki pages with multiple markdown languages.
* An interest in FOSS licensing and software code and origin analysis.

We are happy to help you get up to speed, and the more you are able to demonstrate ability and
skills in advance, the more likely we are to choose your application!

.. _application_gsod:

About your project application
------------------------------

Your application should be in the range of 1000 words, and should contain the following
information, plus anything else that you think is relevant:


- Your name and contact details

- Title of your proposal

- Abstract of your proposal

- Description of your idea including an explanation of what it will contribute to the project,
  such as the software development life cycle requirements that you expect to help with the
  documentation improvements.

- Description of previous work, existing solutions, open-source projects, preferably with links.

- Details of your academic studies and any previous internships.

- Descriptions of your relevant skills.

- Do you plan to have any other commitments during GSOD that may affect your work? Any
  vacations/holidays? Will you be available full time to work on your project? Please apply
  only if this is a serious full time commitment during the GSOD time frame.

Join the chat online or by IRC at https://gitter.im/aboutcode-org/discuss
Introduce yourself and start the discussion!

An excellent, competitive way to demonstrate your capability would be to submit a documentation
improvement to an AboutCode project, especially to ScanCode Toolkit or ScanCode Workbench.

You can pick any project idea from the list below. You can also submit
`Your Documentation Project ideas <#your-documentation-project-ideas>`_.

.. _doc_project_ideas_gsod:

Our Documentation Project ideas
-------------------------------

Here is a list of candidate project ideas for your consideration, organized by documentation
function: **Tutorial** , **How-To** , **Reference** , **Discussion**.

Note that the AboutCode focus for GSOD 2019 is on ScanCode Toolkit and ScanCode Workbench,
although proposals to improve the documents of other AboutCode projects are welcome.

`Your Documentation Project ideas <#your-documentation-project-ideas>`_ are welcome too! Please
chat about them to increase your chances of success!

.. _tutorial_ideas_gsod:

Tutorial ideas
--------------

.. _scan_a_codebase_and_analyze_the_results:

**Scan a Codebase and Analyze the Results**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Provide specific instructions to guide a new user to:


* Scan a somewhat complex sample codebase using scancode-toolkit.
* Import the results into ScanCode Workbench.
* Analyze the scan results.


  * **Level**

    * Intermediate

  * **Tech**

    * Command line processing in a Linux-compatible terminal window

  * **URLS**

    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/blob/develop/README.rst
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/wiki
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/blob/develop/README.md
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/wiki

  * **Mentors**

    * https://github.com/DennisClark

.. _how_to_ideas_gsod:

How-To ideas
------------

.. _how_to_get_the_license_clarity_score_of_a_package:

**How To Get the License Clarity Score of a Package**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Explain the recommended scancode-toolkit options to get a license clarity score.


* **Level**

  * Intermediate

* **Tech**

  * Command line processing in a Linux-compatible terminal window

* **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/blob/develop/README.rst
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/wiki
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/blob/develop/README.md
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/wiki

* **Mentors**

  * https://github.com/DennisClark

.. _how_to_discover_licensing_issues_in_a_software_project:

**How To Discover Licensing Issues in a Software Project**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


* Explain the recommended scancode-toolkit options to discover licenses.
* Explain how to take advantage of license policy support.

  * **Level**

    * Intermediate

  * **Tech**

    * Command line processing in a Linux-compatible terminal window

  * **URLS**

    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/blob/develop/README.rst
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/wiki
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/blob/develop/README.md
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/wiki

  * **Mentors**

    * https://github.com/DennisClark

.. _referance_ideas_gsod:

Reference ideas
---------------

.. _scancode_output_formats:

**ScanCode Output Formats**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Explain the various ScanCode output formats and their business purposes.


* **Level**

  * Intermediate

* **Tech**

  * Command line processing in a Linux-compatible terminal window

* **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/blob/develop/README.rst
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/wiki
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/blob/develop/README.md
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/wiki

* **Mentors**

  * https://github.com/DennisClark

.. _discussion_ideas_gsod:

Discussion ideas
----------------

.. _integrating_scancode_into_a_software_development_lifecycle:

**Integrating ScanCode into a Software Development Lifecycle**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Discuss options and techniques to integrate ScanCode into a software development lifecycle
workflow:


* During software creation and maintenance.
* During software check-out/check-in.
* During sofware build and test.


  * **Level**

    * Intermediate

  * **Tech**

    * Command line processing in a Linux-compatible terminal window

  * **URLS**

    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/blob/develop/README.rst
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/wiki
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/blob/develop/README.md
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench/wiki

  * **Mentors**

    * https://github.com/DennisClark

.. _your_documentation_project_ideas:

Your Documentation Project ideas
--------------------------------

Download and install ScanCode Toolkit and ScanCode Workbench and try them out. For example, you
may try scanning an open source software package in a technology with which you are familiar.
What are the documentation weak points?


* Is it difficult to get started? A **Tutorial** document opportunity.
* Is it difficult to accomplish a specific objective? A **How-To** document opportunity.
* Are the capabilities of the tool too mysterious? Do you want to know more about what you can do
  with it? A **Reference** document opportunity.
* Do you feel that you need to understand its concepts better in order to use it and trust it? Do
  you want to know more about how the code scanning actually works? A **Discussion** document
  opportunity.

Feel free to propose and describe your own documentation ideas.

.. _mentoring_gsod:

Mentoring
---------

We welcome new mentors to help with the program. We require some understanding of the project
domain to join as a mentor. Contact the team on Gitter at https://gitter.im/aboutcode-org/discuss
