.. _GSoC2019:

Google Summer of Code 2019
==========================

AboutCode is participating in the Google Summer of Code in 2019 as a mentoring org. This page
contain all the information for students and anyone else interested in helping.

AboutCode is a family of FOSS projects to uncover data ... about software code:


- where does the code come from? which software package?
- what is its license? copyright?
- is the code secure, maintained, well coded?

All these are questions that are important to answer: there are million
of free and open source software components available on the web for reuse.

Knowing where a software package comes from, what is its license and if it is
vulnerable and what's its licensing should be a problem of the past such that
everyone can safely consume more free and open source software.

*Join us to make it so!*

Our tools are used to help detect and report the origin and license of source
code, packages and binaries as well as discover software and package
dependencies, and in the future track security vulnerabilities, bugs and other
important software package attributes. This is a suite of command line tools,
web-based and API servers and desktop applications.

Table of Contents
-----------------

- :ref:`aboutcode_projects_are_gsoc19`
- :ref:`contact_gsoc19`
- :ref:`technology_gsoc19`
- :ref:`skills_gsoc19`
- :ref:`about_your_project_application_gsoc19`
- :ref:`our_project_ideas_gsoc19`

  * :ref:`improve_copyright_detection_accuracy_and_speed_in_scancode`
  * :ref:`port_scancode_to_python_3_gsoc_2019`
  * :ref:`improve_programming_language_detection_and_classification_in_scancode`
  * :ref:`improve_license_detection_accuracy_and_speed_in_scancode`
  * :ref:`improve_scancode_scan_summarization_and_deduction`
  * :ref:`create_linux_distros_and_freebsd_packages_for_scancode`
  * :ref:`deltacode_projects`
  * :ref:`tracecode_projects`
  * :ref:`conan_and_other_projects`

- :ref:`mentoring_gsoc19`

.. _aboutcode_projects_are_gsoc19:

AboutCode projects are...
-------------------------

- `ScanCode Toolkit <https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit>`_ is a popular
  command line tool to scan code for licenses, copyrights and packages, used by
  many organizations and FOSS projects, small and large.

- `Scancode Workbench <https://github.com/nexB/scancode-workbench>`_
  (formerly AboutCode Manager) is a JavaScript, Electron-based desktop
  application to review scan results and document your origin and license
  conclusions.

- `AboutCode Toolkit <https://github.com/nexB/aboutcode-toolkit>`_ is a
  command line tool to document and inventory known packages and licenses
  and generate attribution docs, typically using the results of analyzed
  and reviewed scans.

- `TraceCode Toolkit <https://github.com/nexB/tracecode-toolkit>`_ is
  a command line tool to find which source code file is used to create a
  compiled binary and trace and graph builds.

- `DeltaCode <https://github.com/nexB/deltacode>`_ is a command line
  tool to compare scans and determine if and where there are material
  differences that affect licensing.

- `ConAn <https://github.com/nexB/conan>`_ : a command line tool to analyze
  the code in Docker and container images

- `VulnerableCode <https://github.com/nexB/vulnerablecode>`_ : an emerging
  server-side application to collect and track known package vulnerabilities.

- `license-expression <https://github.com/nexB/license-expression/>`_ : a library
  to parse, analyze, simplify and render boolean license expression (such as SPDX)

We also work closely, contribute and co-started several other orgs and projects:


-
  `Package URL <https://github.com/package-url>`_  which is an emerging
  standard to reference software packages of all types with simple, readable and
  concise URLs.

-
  `SPDX <http://SPDX.org>`_ aka. Software Package Data Exchange, a spec to
  document the origin and licensing of packages.

-
  `ClearlyDefined <ClearlyDefined.io>`_ to review and help FOSS projects
  improve their licensing and documentation clarity.

.. _contact_gsoc19:

Contact
-------

Join the chat online or by IRC at https://gitter.im/aboutcode-org/discuss
Introduce yourself and start the discussion!

For personal issues, you can contact the primary org admin directly:
@pombredanne and pombredanne@gmail.com

Please ask questions the smart way: http://www.catb.org/~esr/faqs/smart-questions.html

.. _technology_gsoc19:

Technology
----------

Discovering the origin of code is a vast topic. We primarily use Python for this
and some C/C++ (and eventually some Rust and Go) for performance sensitive code and
Electron/JavaScript for GUI.

Our domain includes text analysis and processing (for instance for copyrights
and licenses detection), parsing (for package manifest formats), binary analysis
(to detect the origin and license of binaries, which source code they come from,
etc.) as well as web based tools and APIs (to expose the tools and libraries as
web services) and low-level data structures for efficient matching (such as Aho-
Corasick and other automata).

.. _skills_gsoc19:

Skills
------

Incoming students will need the following skills:


- Intermediate to strong Python programming. For some projects, strong C/C++ and/or Rust is needed
  too.
- Familiarity with git as a version control system
- Ability to set up your own development environment
- An interest in FOSS licensing and software code and origin analysis

We are happy to help you get up to speed, but the more you are able to demonstrate ability and
skills in advance, the more likely we are to choose your application!

.. _about_your_project_application_gsoc19:

About your project application
------------------------------

We expect your application to be in the range of 1000 words. Anything less than
that will probably not contain enough information for us to determine whether
you are the right person for the job. Your proposal should contain at least the
following information, plus anything you think is relevant:


- Your name
- Title of your proposal
- Abstract of your proposal

- Detailed description of your idea including explanation on why is it
  innovative and what it will contribute to the project


  * hint: explain your data structures and you planned main processing flows in
    details.

- Description of previous work, existing solutions (links to prototypes,
  bibliography are more than welcome)

- Mention the details of your academic studies, any previous work, internships

- Relevant skills that will help you to achieve the goal (programming languages,
  frameworks)?

- Any previous open-source projects (or even previous GSoC) you have contributed
  to and links.

- Do you plan to have any other commitments during GSoC that may affect your
  work? Any vacations/holidays? Will you be available full time to work on your
  project? (Hint: do not bother applying if this is not a serious full time
  commitment during the GSoC time frame)

Join the chat online or by IRC at https://gitter.im/aboutcode-org/discuss
introduce yourself and start the discussion!

The best way to demonstrate your capability would be to submit a small patch
ahead of the project selection for an existing issue or a new issue.

We will **always** consider and prefer a project submissions where you have
submitted a patch over any other submission without a patch.

You can pick any project idea from the list below. If you have other ideas that
are not in this list, contact the team first to make sure it makes sense.

.. _our_project_ideas_gsoc19:

Our Project ideas
-----------------

Here is a list of candidate project ideas for your consideration. Your own ideas
are welcomed too! Please chat about them to increase your chances of success!

ScanCode ideas
##############

.. _improve_copyright_detection_accuracy_and_speed_in_scancode:

**Improve Copyright detection accuracy and speed in ScanCode**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Copyright detection is reasonably good by the slowest scanner in ScanCode.
It is based on NLTK part of speech (PoS) tagging and a copyright grammar.
The exact start and end lines where a copyright is found are approximate.

The goal of this project is to refactor Copyright detection for speed and
simplicity possibly implementing a new parser (PEG?, etc.) or re-implementing
core elements in Rust with a Python binding for speed or using a fork of NLTK
or any other tool to be faster and more accurate.

This would include also keeping track of line numbers and offsets where
copyrights are found.

Also we detect copyrights that are part of a standard license text (e.g. FSF
copyright in a GPL text) and we should be able to filter these out.


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, Rust, Go?

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/tree/develop/src/cluecode

- **Mentors**

  * @JonoYang https://github.com/JonoYang

.. _port_scancode_to_python_3_gsoc_2019:

**Port ScanCode to Python 3**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ScanCode runs only on Python 2.7 today. The goal of this project is to port
ScanCode to support both Python 2 and Python 3.


- **Level**

  * Intermediate to Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, C/C++, Go (for native code)

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/295

- **Mentors**

  * @majurg https://github.com/majurg

.. _improve_programming_language_detection_and_classification_in_scancode:

**Improve Programming language detection and classification in ScanCode**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ScanCode programming language detection is not as accurate as it could be and
this is important to get this right to drive further automation. We also need to
automatically classify each file in facets when possible.

The goal of this project is to improve the quality of programming language
detection (which is using only Pygments today and could use another tool, e.g.
some Bayesian classifier like Github linguist, enry ?). And to create and
implement a flexible framework of rules to automate assigning files to facets
which could use some machine learning and classifier.


- **Level**

  * Intermediate to Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/426
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/1012
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/1036

- **Mentors**

  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne

.. _improve_license_detection_accuracy_and_speed_in_scancode:

**Improve License detection accuracy and speed in ScanCode**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ScanCode license detection is using a sophisticated set of techniques
base on automatons, inverted indexes and sequence matching. There are some cases
where license detection accuracy could be improved (such as when scanning long
notices). Other improvements would be welcomed to ensure the proper detected
license text is collected in an improved way. Dealing with large files sometimes
trigger a timeout and handling these cases would be needed too (by breaking files
in chunks). The detection speed could also be improved possibly by porting
some critical code sections to C or Rust and that would need extensive profiling.


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, C/C++, Rust, Go

- **Mentors**

  * @mjherzog https://github.com/mjherzog
  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne

.. _improve_scancode_scan_summarization_and_deduction:

**Improve ScanCode scan summarization and deduction**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The goal of this project is to take existing scan results and infer
summaries and perform some deduction of license and origin at a higher level,
such as the licensing or origin of a whole directory tree. The ultimate goal is
to automate the conclusion of a license and origin based on scans.
This could include using statistics and machine learning techniques such as
classifiers where relevant and efficient.

This should be implemented as a set of ScanCode plugins and further the
summarycode module plugins.


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python (Rust and Go welcomed too)

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/426
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/377

- **Mentors**

  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne
  * @JonoYang https://github.com/JonoYang

.. _create_linux_distros_and_freebsd_packages_for_scancode:

**Create Linux distros and FreeBSD packages for ScanCode**.
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The goal of this project is to ensure that we have proper packages for Linux
distros and FreeBSD for ScanCode.

The first step is to debundle pre-built binaries that exist in ScanCode such
that they come either from system-packages or pre-built Python wheels. This
covers libarchive, libmagic and a few other native libraries and has been
recently completed.

The next step is to ensure that all the dependencies from ScanCode are also
available as distro packages.

The last step is to create proper distro packages for RPM, Debian, FreeBSD and
as many other distros such as Nix and GUIX, Alpine, Arch and Gentoo (and possibly
also AppImage.org packages and Docker images) and submit these package to the distros.

As a bonus, the same could then be done for AboutCode toolkit and TraceCode.

This requires a good understanding of packaging and Python.


- **Level**

  * Intermediate to Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, Linux, C/C++ for native code

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/487
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit/issues/469

- **Mentor**

  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne

.. _deltacode_projects:

DeltaCode projects
##################

**Approximately Similar file detection in DeltaCode**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

DeltaCode is a tool to compare and report scan differences.
When comparing files, it only uses exact comparison.
The goal of this project is to improve the usefulness of the delta by also
finding files that are mostly the same (e.g. quasi or nrea duplicates) vs. files
that are completely different. Then the DeltaCode comparison core should be
updated accordingly to detect and report material changes to scans (such as
new, update or removed licenses, origins and packages) when changes are also
meterial in the code files (e.g. such that small changes may be ignored)


- **Level**

  * Intermediate to Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/deltacode/

- **Mentors**

  * @majurg https://github.com/majurg
  * @johnmhoran https://github.com/johnmhoran

.. _tracecode_projects:

TraceCode projects
##################

**Static analysis of binaries for build tracing in TraceCode**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TraceCode does system call tracing only today. The primary goal of this project
is to create a tool that provides the same results as the strace-based tracing
but would be using using ELF symbols, DWARF debug symbols, signatures or string
matching to  determine when and how a source code file is built in a binary
using only a static analysis. The primary target should be Linux executables,
though the code should be designed to be extensible to Windows PE and macOS Dylib and exes.


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, Linux, ELFs, DWARFs, symbols, reversing

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/tracecode-toolkit for the existing non-static tool
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit-contrib for some work in progress on binaries/symbols
    parsers/extractors

- **Mentor**

  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne

**Improve dynamic build tracing in TraceCode**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TraceCode does system call tracing and relies on kernel-space system calls and
in particular tracing file descriptors. This project should improve the tracing
of the lifecycle of file descriptors when tracing a build with strace. We need
to improve how TraceCode does system call tracing by improving the way we track
open/close file descriptors in the trace to reconstruct the lifecycle of a traced
file. This requires to understand and dive if the essence of system calls and
file lifecycle from a kernel point of view and build datastructure and code
to reconstruct user-space file activity from the kernel traces along a timeline.

This project also would cover updating TraceCode to use the Click command
line toolkit (like for ScanCode).


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, Linux kernel, system calls

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/tracecode-toolkit for the existing non-static tool
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit-contrib for the work in progress on binaries/symbols
    parsers/extractors

- **Mentor**

  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne

.. _conan_and_other_projects:

Conan and Other projects
########################

**Containers and VM images static package analysis**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The goal of this project is to further the Conan container static analysis tool
to effectively support proper inventory of installed packages without running
the containers.

This includes determining which packages are installed in Docker layers for
RPMs, Debian or Alpine Linux in a static way. And this may eventually require
the integration with ScanCode.


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, Go, containers, distro package managers, RPM, Debian, Alpine

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/conan

- **Mentor**

  * @JonoYang https://github.com/JonoYang

**DependentCode: a mostly universal Package dependencies resolver**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The goal of this project is to create a tool for a universal package
dependencies resolution using a SAT solver that should leverage the detected
packages from ScanCode and the Package URLs and could provide a good enough way
to resolve package dependencies for many system and application package formats.
This is a green field project.


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Python, C/C++, Rust, SAT

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/package-url
  * https://fosdem.org/2018/schedule/event/purl/
  * https://github.com/heremaps/oss-review-toolkit

- **Mentors**

  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne

**VulnerableCode Package security vulnerability correlated data feed**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This project is to futher and evolve the VulnerableCode server and software
package vulnerabilities data aggregator.

VulnerableCode was started as a GSoC project in 2017. Its goal is to
collect, aggregate and correlate vulnerabilities data and provide semi-automatic
correlation. In the end it should provide the basis to report vulnerabilities
alerts found in packages identified by ScanCode.

This is not trivial as there are several gaps in the CVE data and how they
relate to packages as they are detected by ScanCode or else.

The features and TODO for this updated server would be:


- Aggregate more and new packages vulnerabilities feeds,

- Automating correlation: add smart relationship detection to infer new
  relatiosnhips between available packages and vulnerabilities from mining the
  graph of existing relations.

- Create a ScanCode plugin to report vulnerabilities with detected packages
  using this data.

- Integrate API lookup on the server withe the AboutCode Manager UI

- Create a UI and model for community curation of vulnerability to package
  mappings, correlations and enhancements.


- **Level**

    * Advanced

- **Tech**

    * Python, Django

- **URLS**

    * https://github.com/nexB/vulnerablecode
    * https://github.com/nexB/aboutcode-manager
    * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit
    * Other interesting pointers:

      * https://github.com/cve-search/cve-search
      * https://github.com/jeremylong/DependencyCheck/
      * https://github.com/victims/victims-cve-db
      * https://github.com/rubysec/ruby-advisory-db
      * https://github.com/future-architect/vuls
      * https://github.com/coreos/clair
      * https://github.com/anchore/anchore/
      * https://github.com/pyupio/safety-db
      * https://github.com/RetireJS/retire.js
      * and many more including Linux distro feeds

- **Mentors**

    * @majurg https://github.com/majurg
    * @JonoYang https://github.com/JonoYang

**High volume matching automatons and data structures**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Finding similar code is a way to detect the origin of code against an index of
open source code.

To enable this, we need to research and create efficient and compact data
structures that are specialized for the type of data we lookup. Given the volume
to consider (typically multi billion values indexed) there are special
considerations to have compact and memory efficient dedicated structures (rather
than using a general purpose DB or Key/value pair store) that includes looking
at automata, and memory mapping. This types of data structures should be
implemented in Rust as a preference (though C/C++ is OK) and include Python
bindings.

There are several areas to research and prototype such as:


- A data structure to match efficiently a batch of fix-width checksums (e.g.
  SHA1) against a large index of such checksums, where each checksum points to
  one or more files or packages. A possible direction is to use finite state
  transducers, specialized B-tree indexes, blomm-like filters. Since when a
  codebase is being matched there can be millions of lookups to do, the batch
  matching is preferred.

- A data structure to match efficiently a batch of fix-width byte strings (e.g.
  LSH) against a large index of such LSH within a fixed hamming distance, where
  each points to one or more files or packages. A possible direction is to use
  finite state transducers (possibly weighted), specialized B-tree indexes or
  multiple hash-like on-disk tables.

- A memory-mapped Aho-Corasick automaton to build large batch tree matchers.
  Available Aho-Corasick automatons may not have a Python binding or may not allow
  memory-mapping (like pyahocorasick we use in ScanCode). The volume of files we
  want to handle requires to reuse, extend or create specialized tree/paths
  matching automatons that can handle eventually billions of nodes and are larger
  than the available memory. A possible direction is to use finite state
  transducers (possibly weighted).

- Feature hashing research: we deal with many "features" and hashing to limit
  the number and size of the each features seems to be a valuable thing. The goal
  is to research the validaty of feature hashing with short hashes (15, 16 and
  32 bits) and evaluate if this leads to acceptable false-positive and loss of
  accuracy in the context of the data structures mentioned above.

Then using these data structures, the project should create a system for
matching code as a Python-based server exposing a simple API.
This is a green field project.


- **Level**

  * Advanced

- **Tech**

  * Rust, Python

- **URLS**

  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit-contrib for samecode fingerprints drafts.
  * https://github.com/nexB/scancode-toolkit for commoncode hashes

- **Mentors**

  * @pombredanne https://github.com/pombredanne

.. _mentoring_gsoc19:

Mentoring
---------

We welcome new mentors to help with the program and require some good unerstanding of the project
codebase and domain to join as a mentor. Contact the team on Gitter.
